[2024-09-26 15:18:29] Did my first [[AV1]] transcode today.
I noticed that Netflix is delivering content on Chrome in AV1 now, which I was suprised about. I still thought it was another year or so away, and I'm not sure if Chrome and the Mac can decode it natively or not. Either way, Handbrake supports encoding with AV1 now too. So I did a 10 second transcode of the film Chicago. At 4 Mbps. The results were interesting. Technically HEVC has more detail and data in each frame. It preserves grain a LOT better. But AV1, whilst removing grain, keeps the look of the image perhaps a bit better. I am curious to run some tests and see if AV1 LOOKS better. I feel like it's smarter than HEVC and will likely look better to the average person. The scene was grainy and had lots of fast movement, so 4 Mbps was a low bitrate. Low bitrates is where newer codes tend to outshine older codecs. I haven't yet tested to see how AV1 does at decently high bitrates where I want it to look transparent to the original. H264 still often looks better than HEVC at HD resoloutions at high bitrates as it's doing less tricks. I would imagine the same is true for AV1. And as great as it might be at low bitrates I reckon that HEVC will still be the best choice for 4K content at high bitrates. Go to this folder to see the screenshots: /Users/elliotclowes/Dropbox/Videoshots/2024/09/Chicago - Remux vs AV1 vs HEVC. [Dropbox link](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fo/kjxog5hqxj5etpzkt312g/AAy-7NWjp0dyI1Vl97d28ZM?rlkey=z1z0ltqxxgqhznin4jugb1tui&st=1bb4g014&dl=0)

[2024-09-26 16:38:29] Added [[Asterisk magazine]] to my RSS list.
Mainly because I like the look of the site and [[Henrik Karlsson]] wrote an article for them. https://asteriskmag.com/issues/07/culture-studies

[2024-09-26 16:42:58] Unsubscribed from the [[Farnam Street]] email newsletter.
It has too many 'Tiny Thoughts' and just hasn't been useful to me.

[2024-09-26 16:47:58] Unsubscribed from the Extra Focus newsletter.
It's about ADHD. But I neve really read it. A long time coming.
