---
id: c09289f2-ab96-4d71-8599-2c2381ceb3fb
site_name: manuelmoreale.com
date_saved: 2024-06-06
date_read: 2024-06-09
date_archived: 2024-06-09T08:53:53.000Z
original_url: https://manuelmoreale.com/curation-search-and-the-future-of-the-web
omnivore_url: https://omnivore.app/me/curation-search-and-the-future-of-the-web-manu-18fedad4a44
---

 - Site: manuelmoreale.com
 - By: 
 - Date published: 
 - Date read: [[2024-06-09]]
 - [Read Original](https://manuelmoreale.com/curation-search-and-the-future-of-the-web)
 - [Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/curation-search-and-the-future-of-the-web-manu-18fedad4a44)
 - Tags:  #Technology 
 - Notes: 

**Note:** Below is the text from the article, with any ==highlights== done by me. None of the writing below is by me.

# Article text
Google I/O 2024 is underway and a bunch of articles came out about what Google's changes to its core product (search) mean for the web as a whole. Sean Hollister at The Verge [has a piece on the new “web” search option](https://www.theverge.com/2024/5/14/24074314/google-now-offers-web-search) (a piece that starts with _“This is not a joke”_) while Casey Newton wrote a nice articled titled [“Google’s broken link to the web”](https://www.platformer.news/google-io-ai-search-sundar-pichai/).

Unsurprisingly Google has revealed that AI is going to be integrated pretty much everywhere, and the goal is to let the AI do the googling for you. Which sounds great, in theory. After all, as the fine people at The Browser Company have eloquently explained to the world, the web is in such a terrible state that the only way out of this madness is to let an AI deal with all the garbage and spammy content that’s out there. I already [expressed my doubts about this plan](https://manuelmoreale.com/a-rant-on-arc-search) and I don’t think what Google is doing is any better.

Google, as a company, is in an odd position. They are, fundamentally, an advertising company. Almost 70% of their revenues are generated by ads. Ads on the SERP, ads on their various products and ads served by their ad network on 3rd party websites. When they say that they’re going to do the googling for you they don’t just mean the search part. In theory, AI will also go find the information you’re looking for on 3rd party sites so they’ll do the googling but also the actual browsing. Did you spot the issue? How are people going to consume ads on 3rd party sites if you no longer need to visit 3rd party sites? And if AI is going to take over the entire top part of the SERP with its generated answer, why should companies pay Google to appear at the top of the search results if those search results are not going to be seen by the majority of people?

It’s a bizarre situation. The answer to missing ad revenues is obviously going to be more ads. I’m sure Google will figure out a way to inject ads into their AI-generated bullshit.

Some people are obviously freaking out about the recent news. That’s because a huge number of sites out there rely on Google to bring traffic to their websites, sites that are then monetised via ads in most cases. If traffic goes down, ad revenues go down. And that’s a bad thing, right? Right? Well, maybe? I guess it depends. The current state of the web is unsustainable. And maybe AI and AI-generated garbage is what we need to push the current situation over the edge and force some changes.

I think curation, actual human curation, is going to play an important role in the future. In a web filled with generated nonsense, content curated by knowledgeable human beings is going to be incredibly valuable.

