### 08:42
[New clowes.blog post](https://clowes.blog/2024/07/09/i-love-the.html):

> I love the wonderful terminology of American music in the 1940’s. [[Crooner]], [[Bobby soxer]], doo-wop, hep cat, zoot suit, rag cutter, jitterbug, be-bop, boogie-woogie, hepcat, juke joint, swooner, moldy fig, killer-diller.
***
### 08:46
There's the term "trad wife" on the internet. I knew what it meant, but not really where the "trad" came from. I thought it might be related to "chad". But in my morning of poking around Wikipedia about American music pre-1940s I stumbled on the genre [[Trad jazz]]. "Trad" as in "traditional". And then it hit me, "trad wife" is "traditional wife". It all of a sudden makes sense.

I got to trad jazz via the [[Moldy fig]] [page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moldy_figs). They were "purist advocates of early jazz... who argued that jazz took a wrong turn in the early 1920s with developments such as the introduction of printed scores". Rudi Blesh, for example, dismissed the work of [[Duke Ellington]] as "tea dansant music" with no jazz content whatever. And it just goes to show that every new music evolution will be met with renitence by some. Obvious, I know. But it really is true with *every single* musical genre.
***
### 12:11
Yesterday was the first day in a long time where I managed to do the following:
- Eat less than <3000 calories.
- Not have eat refined sugar.
- Eat a piece of fruit.

Do I feel a world of difference today? No. But I do feel better. And it was one day. I need to keep this up and I'll very quickly return to my old self.