[2024-07-18 07:17:14] I’m #Awake

[2024-07-18 08:03:18] Making a #Coffee. #Dad is going to try and see if my shower is broken due to a blown fuse. So he needs to go deep into the loft. He’ll need my help, providing light.

[2024-07-18 08:31:08] Looking at flannel shirts.
I've got a few, but since I've gained weight, they're all a bit small. So I want a bigger one for the upcoming autumn, in case I don't lose weight. They were always a bit tight to be fair. So it would be good to have a loose fitting one to be honest. Not sure who to go with though. Abercrombie & Fitch don't have much of a selection and are expensive. L.L. Bean is good, but still based in America I think. So shipping is slow and expensive. I doubt Zara does much flannel – and I'm not a fan of their quality anyway.

[2024-07-18 08:32:23] 👆 Although I do have a £20 Zara gift voucher I need to use up.

[2024-07-18 08:50:22] #Read https://om.co/2024/07/17/social-internet-has-ed/

[2024-07-18 08:52:28] #Read https://cupofjo.com/2024/07/17/whats-something-popular-you-just-dont-get/

[2024-07-18 08:54:55] #Read https://brandons-journal.com/post/forks/

[2024-07-18 09:28:16] Written a review for [[Air (2023)]] on #clowesblog https://clowes.blog/2024/07/18/film-review-air.html

[2024-07-18 09:59:00] Just #ShavedBeard

[2024-07-18 10:09:55] Something I've learnt when it comes to meetings is that recurring ones are death.
Unless they're run very well and an agenda is always there, they're terrible. People stop turning up. Everyone doesn't want to be there. And they're often pointless. It's much better if meetings are done on an ad-hoc basis, in my opinion. I get it, having a recurring meeting forces collaboration. And people might quietly suffer, instead of booking a meeting. But that's because everyone has too many meetings. If we didn't have so many people would be less shy about booking them in. #Work

[2024-07-18 10:17:19] Tried to find out when my Literary Review subscription ends.
Answer: not sure. Website isn't useful. Would probably have to call. But I think it will renew for £40. That's fair. I'm just happy for it to renew.

[2024-07-18 14:24:46] For some reason when I keep on logging into my Mac it's telling me that my screen is being observed.
It isn't, but I do use a lot of apps that use that privilage. So I thought maybe if it's running in the background it counts as 'observed'. Or maybe the process just keeps on not stopping. But I can't work out what it is. And I think it's slowing down my computer. I see 'replayd' near the top in Activity Monitor. I just tried killing all apps to see if it disappeared, but I didn't. So I've force killed replayd and will see if it appears again after launching a specific app.

[2024-07-18 16:37:54] Some plumbers have been around to try and fix the two broken showes.
#Dad fixed one of them. It just needed a reboot. The other one requires a part that will be here in a few days.

[2024-07-18 18:15:16] At station picking up #Abigail

[2024-07-18 18:16:06] #NewWord mentee: a person who is advised, trained, or counselled by a mentor.

[2024-07-18 18:53:54] Just as I was feeling the Autumnal spirit (despite it being mid July) due to the 'bad' UK weather, a couple of warm days come along :( It's currently 26c out.
I hate it.

[2024-07-18 18:59:32] Now that my Todoist 'Inbox' is only full of 'proper' and important todos and not just a 'inbox' I'm finding it so much easier to get them done.
Having a smaller list is less intimidating. And the thought that I could have 'inbox zero' for Todoist excites me. I WILL DO IT.

[2024-07-18 21:48:11] #Ate 2x chicken burgers for dinner, with wedges. Was nice, as always. Those Birdseye tempura chicken things are tasty. Watched [[Clarkson’s Farm]] whilst eating it. We were considering watching [[House of the Dragon]] afterwards, but #Abigail wasn’t feeling it.

[2024-07-18 21:53:45] Looks like Google Docs now lets you export it as a .md https://www.threads.net/@kepano/post/C9kiqVePnvX/?xmt=AQGzy290lhpIEd4Ryl5Uat1eN2KdopG_mp6DW4BZSsYL_g

[2024-07-18 22:13:33] The moon is so bright I can see its glow _through_ the tree outside my bedroom window.
