06:56: I randomly woke up a bit earlier today. Around 05:30 I think. I was going to go straight out for my morning walk, but it was still a little bit dark, and I knew I had to wake up Abigail at 6 am potentially as it’s her first day of her new job, so I couldn’t risk her potentially sleeping in. Then went for a very short walk, because for some reason nearly as soon as I set off I started to get what felt like heart palpitations, which was odd. So I didn’t walk for long just about 12 minutes. After that I came home and made a coffee and was planning on reading. But but a time I’ve written my review of [[Challengers (2024)]] I’ve only got about 20 minutes. I think I will still read, but I always like to have at least 30 minutes plus of time to read. I’m reading [["Principles for Dealing with the Changing World Order - Why Nations Succeed or Fail" by Ray Dalio]] at the minute.

21:18: i’m struggling to get into the habit of keeping up these logs during the day. And today is another example of that. There hasn’t been a great deal to report. Mostly just work and dinner and a little bit of TV baby reindeer). But at least I’m keeping the 1-1-1 habit at the moment (see below). 

## [[1-1-1]]

- The main win from today is how much energy I had post-2pm. I would say after about then I start to crash (especially now I’m getting up between 06:00 and 06:15). So it made me so happy when I managed to get some actual work done in the evening. I was working up to around 18:00 when Abigail texted me that she was on her way home from work (her new job. First day!).
- The main point of anxiety today was the heart palpitations I felt on my morning walk. Nothing too crazy, and my heart rate itself never rose much, but it wasn’t pleasant and I had to cut my walk short. And it’s just not a great start to the day.
- I’m mostly grateful today that my appetite has been low and I’ve managed to eat very little (will help with my weight loss that I badly need). And for the first time in many, many months I’m excited for the end of the week when I’ll allow myself a takeaway and some sweets (I have Bebto laces, I love those). Mum said she’s get us all a fish & chips on Friday, partly in celebration of Abigail’s new job. And I’m really looking forward to having fish & chips and then eating some sweets whilst watching a movie. I’m excited. And that should help motivate me to be healthy in the week. Oh I’m also grateful that Abigail had what seems five a great first day at her job and that she came back in such a good mood. It makes me happy seeing her happy. One more thing actually. I’m happy I’m managing to turn this 1-1-1 thing into a habit. Habits in general I’ve found easier than normal over the past week or so. 